```
2017, Feb 11 - Dimitri Merejkowsky
License: CC By 4.0
```

Last weekend I attended FOSDEM 2017[1] in Brussels, Belgium.

=> https://fosdem.org/2017/ 1: https://fosdem.org/2017/

Here are, in no particular order, things I heard and seen while being there.

## Stuff on slides


https://fosdem.org/2017/schedule/event/freifunk_access_human_right/

> Access for refugees: A government task, but the Freifunk community fixed it.
> [...]
> We provide free Internet access, so that they can use their money for
> food and family and not for prepaid internet dealers


https://fosdem.org/2017/schedule/event/de_google_ify/

> "How many likes did I get" are the new slot machines of the Internet.

https://fosdem.org/2017/schedule/event/copyleft_defense/)

> I got kicked out of university after delivering a brilliant lecture on the
> aggressive influence of German philosophy on rock and roll entitled: *You,
> Kant, Always Get What You Want*.
>
> — John Cameron Mitchell

## Quotes

Some speaker:

> I was working in a big company, so nobody here wanted to write code that actually worked.

De-google-ify Internet:

> We help our users leave our service if they want to go for an alternative
> of what we do.
>
> When they do leave, we party.

Elsewhere:

> From an English-speaking point of view it's hard to keep up with all the
> awesome stuff you are doing in France

In the "Decentralized Internet room":

> Is that an implementation of the CHATONS protocol?


YunoHost speaker:

> If you come contributing to YunoHost, expect French. Don't worry, it's not
> a disease.

## Scenes

=> https://fosdem.org/2017/schedule/event/dinosaurs/

Resurrecting Dinosaurs, what could possibly go wrong?
```
SPEAKER: I did not expect to have a win32 architecture slide here at FOSDEM
```

You know what's cool? Running on billions of devices:
```
QUESTION: Have you been approached by a government agency to introduce a backdoor?
ANSWER:   Well, if I had I could not tell you. I suggest you go read the
          code, and if you find one, please let me know.
```

Unbreakable Unit Tests
```
SPEAKER: Who here is using TDD?
*Half the audience raises their hand*
SPEAKER: Who here has been doing that for more than five years?
*An other guy and I raise our hands*
*I feel old*
```

Understanding The Complexity of Copyleft Defense
```
BRADLEY M. KUHN: Copyleft is a *strategy*

Community-oriented enforcement must never prioritize financial gain.

So, I encourage you to wake up, demand your copyrights back, and use the
licensing strategy you think is best for long-term software freedom.

```

Access is a human right
```
*German presenter starts talking*
*French organizer tell him to wait 40 seconds because the recording is not ready*
PRESENTER: Timing is strict here
ORGANIZER: Well, we're a bit German. And I mean that in a good way
```

Let's de-Google-ify the Internet
```
SPEAKER: You just need a web browser, so please use Firefox
*Crowd applause*
```


libre.sh helps you to host your FLOSS
```
*In the middle of a live demo*
*Types a command on the terminal*
*Console gets flooded with warning messages*
SPEAKER: You can safely ignore these warnings
*Everyone laughs*
```


Puffin: Free Webapp Hosting for Average Users
```
SPEAKER: Let's start with a demo
*Clicks the register button*
*Enters the 'login' field*
*Lots of suggestions are displayed: 'test', 'test1', 'test2', ...*
*Types 'test6'*
*Everyone laughs*
```

FreedomBox, liberty inside the cloud

```
QUESTION: Are you going to include an e-mail client and server in the freedombox distribution?
ANSWER: Well, no. I think certain things need to die at some point.
```

And, last but not least:

## FOSDEM in a nutshell


Decentralized Internet devroom
```
TRISTAN NITOT: The room is full at 9 AM on a Sunday morning after a
short night, a long evening and probably too many beers. Thanks for
coming!
```

See you next year!

=> index.gmi Back to Index
=> ../contact.gmi Contact me
